---
layout: post
title: Implementing a File Watcher (MacOS & Linux)
---
# High Level Goals & Use Cases

I created jp-watch as the the first layer of these higher level goals:

## Create a personal cloud

I want it to be **geographically independent** to avoid problems such as natural disasters or large scale network outages. The geographical independence can potentially be leveraged to reduce latency to services located on servers closer to the user.

I want it to be **company independent** in case there is some problem with the company such as it going bankrupt.

## Sync local development files with a server

Even though development and testing can be done locally, it\'s good to test in an environment closer to the production environment including the same hardware, same network and same DNS. Having a fast and efficient way to sync these files with a production server will aid this process.

# Existing File Watching Tools Reviewed

There are a few good tools about. Two of the most popular being inotifywait and fswatch.

## inotifywait

inotifywait is a great tool but is not available on MacOS.

When using an inotify implementation the code needs to recursively mark
each file/directory to be watched at startup. Each file descriptor needs
to be stored giving it linear complexity O(n) for both startup time and
memory usage. Granted inotify is very efficient, this is still a factor
to take into consideration for some use cases where you want to watch
very large amounts of files on a device with limited resources.

The code for inotify implementations is also somewhat complicated as the
code needs to scan and watch the paths at startup and also add new paths
while running as new files and/or directories are added. This adds
further potential for coding bugs. It also adds to code maintenance
costs.

## fswatch

Fswatch is a great tool also. But the limitations I found were that when
reporting changes to files or directories it would not distinguish
between them by placing a trailing slash as inotifywait would.

I could get it to do what I wanted on MacOS with a few options:

```fswatch --event-flags --event=IsDir --event=IsFile <directory>```

On Ubuntu 22 this command would not report IsFile events.

# Implementations of the High Level Goals

Implementations of the high levels goals went through various stages and evolved through various languages over time:

## Bash

I originally used a bash script with inotifywait. As the bash script got
more complex I decided to move to either Ruby or Node.js as large bash scripts are a nightmare to maintain.

## Ruby

Ruby is my favourate language for coding command-line tools that are not performance critical. It\'s an amazing scripting language with an amazing progression from single line scripts to complex object-oriented tools. I had a Ruby version of the script I used for the second use case I described in the introduction, but I wanted to consolidate all my code into a form that made things easier. I wanted to simplify everything including my language choices so there was less maintainance for my projects. I was trying to finish 12 half done projects and wanted to consolidate them both structurally and language-wise.

## Node.js

Since I could use Javascript on the frontend, backend and for scripting,
in the end I thought it a better option. Particularly as my Javascript skills had now reached a good level and I could produce code quite rapidly. The Javascript tools now also being fairly mature and powerful. So finally, a good choice seemed to be Node.js and creating npm code packages. This is
why I rewrote the tool in Node.js rather than Ruby.

I made a Node.js version of the tool and it worked well. It ran into some issues though such as if too many rsyncs were launched in parallel the program crashed. This would happen if I installed some npm packages for instance that would add a whole bunch of new files into a watched directory suddenly. I managed to overcome this by launching the rsync serially rather than in parallel.

The final part of the puzzle was making this tool work on MacOS also. Since I was still using `inotifywait` I had to find a MacOS option. I played around with `fswatch` but found the limitations I listed above. In order to get a tool that was high performance and consistent across platforms I descided I would just make my own since I could get it just the way I wanted instead of hacking around the existing tools. This was the birth of `jp-watch`.

# Algorithms

## MacOS

The MacOS version just sets the relevant paths to be
watched from the CLI arguments.

## Linux

The Linux version uses fanotify to watch the whole filesystem and filters out irrelevant paths.

Previous file watcher were based on inotify, kqueue or epoll where you need to recursively add the contents of paths at the start to be watched, and manually add new paths to be watched if they are added after the app starts. This adds code complexity, more bug potential and more maintenance.

# APIs

## FSStream (MacOS)

The MacOS FSStream API allows monitoring of whole directory trees which
can lead to greater performance than some lower level APIs as it can be
optimised in the future without affecting the API endpoints and could incorporate MacOS specific or device specific optimisations as needed.

## fanotify (Linux)

The fanotify API allows us to have instant startup and low, constant
memory usage of O(1). inotify needs to add all the paths recursively that need to be watched and also uses memory for this process giving it O(n) memory usage.

On the downside, fanotify requires superuser (CAP_SYS_ADMIN) privileges.

# jp-watch

## How to Use

First, head to https://github.com/jdspugh/jp-watch-c and follow the \"Installation\" instructions. Once you have it installed you can try out some commands.

Watch the local directory:

```$ jp-watch .```

Watch the whole drive:

```$ jp-watch /```

Watch a few different files and directories with a combination of relative and absolute paths:

```$ jp-watch README.md jp-watch.c /var/www /tmp```

## Future Improvements

The Linux version filters out unwatched paths, but the algorithm used is O(n) time complexity. This could potentially be be reduced to O(log(n)) if it's found to be a bottleneck. At the moment for my use cases I watch a handfull of large directory trees, so there is no problem.

# Conclusion

jp-watch is a fast and efficient file watching tool that produces consistent results on both MacOS and Linux. I hope you enjoy using it and find some great use cases for it in your projects!